<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>
				<a id="CHAPTER_V">CHAPTER V</a>
			</h4>
			<p">While below they took me into the patio, that quiet inner garden which was so attractive from above. It was a lovely place. The moon was riding high and shone down into it; a slender fountain spray rose shimmering from its carved basin; on the southern-facing wall a great wistaria vine drooped in budding purple, and beds of violets made the air rich with soft fragrance.</p>
			<p>Here and there were people walking; and in the shadowy corners sat young couples, apparently quite happy.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose you don‚Äôt know the names of one of them,‚Äù I suggested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOn the contrary, I know nearly all,‚Äù answered Hallie. ‚ÄúThese apartments are taken very largely by friends and acquaintances. You see, the gardens and roofs are in common, and there are the reading-rooms, ballrooms, and so on. It is pleasanter to be friends to begin with, and most of us get to be afterward, if we are not at first.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut surely there are some disagreeable people left on earth!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes; but where there is so much more social life people get together in congenial sets,‚Äù put in Nellie; ‚Äújust as we used to in summer resorts.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere aren‚Äôt so many bores and fools as there used to be, John,‚Äù Owen remarked. ‚ÄúWe really do raise better people. Even the old ones have improved. You see, life is so much pleasanter and more interesting.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôre all healthier. Uncle John, because we‚Äôre better fed; that makes us more agreeable.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs more art in the world to make us happier,‚Äù said Jerrold. ‚ÄúHallie thinks it‚Äôs all due to her everlasting bread and butter. Listen to that now!‚Äù</p>
			<p>From a balcony up there in the moonlight came a delicious burst of melody; a guitar and two voices, and the refrain was taken up from another window, from one corner of the garden, from the roof; all in smooth accord.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour group here must be an operatic one,‚Äù I suggested. But my nephew answered that it was not, but that music‚ÅÝ‚Äîgood music‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas so common now, and so well taught, that the average was high in both taste and execution.</p>
			<p>We sat late that night, my new family bubbling over with things to say, and filling my mind with a confused sense of new advantages, unexplained and only half believed.</p>
			<p>I could not bring myself to accept as commonplace facts the unusual excellences so glibly described, and I suppose my silence showed this as well as what I said, for my sister presently intervened with decision:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe must all stop this for to-night,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúJohn feels as if he was being forcibly fed‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe‚Äôs got to rest. Then I suggest that to-morrow Owen take him in hand‚ÅÝ‚Äîgo off for a tramp, why don‚Äôt you?‚ÅÝ‚Äîand really straighten out things. You see, there are two distinct movements to consider, the unconscious progress that would have taken place anyway in thirty years, and then the deliberate measures adopted by the ‚ÄòNew Lifers,‚Äô and it‚Äôs rather confusing. I‚Äôve labored with him all the way home now; I think the man‚Äôs point of view will help.‚Äù</p>
			<div class="tb">* * * * *</div>
			<p>Owen was a big man with a strong, wholesome face, and a quizzical little smile of his own. He and I went up the river next morning in a swift motor boat, which did not batter the still air with muffled banging as they used to do, and strolled off in the bright spring sunshine into Palisade Park.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôve saved all the loveliest of it‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor keeps,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúOut here, where the grass and trees are just as they used to be, you won‚Äôt be bothered, and one expositor will be easier to handle than four at once. Now, shall I talk, or will you ask questions?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôd like to ask a few questions first, then you can expound by the hour. Do give me the long and short of this ‚Äòwomen-waked-up‚Äô proposition. What does it mean‚ÅÝ‚Äîto a man?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Owen stroked his chin.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo loss,‚Äù he said at length; ‚Äúat least, no loss that‚Äôs not covered by a greater gain. Do you remember the new biological theory in regard to the relative position of the sexes that was beginning to make headway when we were young?‚Äù</p>
			<p>I nodded. ‚ÄúWard‚Äôs theory? Oh, yes; I heard something of it. Pretty far-fetched, it seemed to me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFar-fetched and dear-bought, but true for all that. You‚Äôll have to swallow it. The female is the race type; the male is her assistant. It‚Äôs established beyond peradventure.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I meditated, painfully. I looked at Owen. He had just as happy and proud a look as if he was a real man‚ÅÝ‚Äînot merely an Assistant. I though of Jerrold‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing cowed about him; of the officers and men on the ship; of such men as I had seen in the street.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose this applies in the main to remote origins?‚Äù I suggested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt holds good all through life‚ÅÝ‚Äîis just as true as it ever was.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo you mean that women run everything, and men are only helpers?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, no; I wasn‚Äôt talking about human life at all‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly about sex. ‚ÄòRunning things‚Äô has nothing to do with that. Women run some businesses and are in practically all, but men still do the bulk of the world‚Äôs work. There is a natural division of labor, after all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>This was pleasant to hear, but he dashed my hopes.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMen do almost all the violent plain work‚ÅÝ‚Äîdigging and hewing and hammering; women, as a class, prefer the administrative and constructive kinds. But all that is open yet, and settling itself gradually; men and women are working everywhere. The big change which Nellie is always referring to means simply that women ‚Äòwaked up‚Äô to a realization of the fact that they were human beings.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat were they before, pray?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOnly female beings.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFemale human beings, of course,‚Äù said I.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes; a little human, but mostly female. Now they are mostly human. It is a great change.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt follow you. Aren‚Äôt they still wives and mothers?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are still mothers‚ÅÝ‚Äîfar more so than they were before, as a matter of fact; but as to being wives‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs a difference.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I was displeased, and showed it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, is it Polygamy, or Polyandry, or Trial Marriages, or what?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Owen gazed at me with an expression very like Nellie‚Äôs.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere it is,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúYou can only think about women in some sort of relation to men, of a change in marriage relations as merely a change in kind; whereas what has happened is a change in degree. We still have monogamous marriages, on a much purer and more lasting plane than a generation ago; but the word ‚Äòwife‚Äô does not mean what it used to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGo on‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI can‚Äôt follow you at all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA ‚Äòwife‚Äô used to be a possession; ‚Äòwilt thou be mine?‚Äô said the lover, and the wife was ‚Äòhis.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhose else is she now?‚Äù I asked with some sharpness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe does not ‚Äòbelong‚Äô to anyone in that old sense. She is the wife of her husband in that she is his true lover, and that their marriage is legally recorded; but her life and work does not belong to him. He has no right to her ‚Äòservices‚Äô any more. A woman who is in a business‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike Hallie, for instance‚ÅÝ‚Äîdoes not give it up when she marries.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I stopped him. ‚ÄúWhat! Isn‚Äôt Hallie married?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚Äînot yet.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is her flat?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes; why not?‚Äù He laughed at me. ‚ÄúYou see, you can‚Äôt imagine a woman having a home of her own. Hallie is twenty-three. She won‚Äôt marry for some years, probably; but she has her position and is doing excellent work. It‚Äôs only a minor inspectorship, but she likes it. Why shouldn‚Äôt she have a home?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy doesn‚Äôt she have it with you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause I like to live with my wife. Her business, and mine, are in Michigan; Hallie‚Äôs in New York.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd when she marries she keeps on being an inspector?‚Äù I queried.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPrecisely. The man who marries that young woman will have much happiness, but he will not ‚Äòown‚Äô her, and she will not be his wife in the sense of a servant. She will not darn his socks or cook his meals. Why should she?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWill she not nurse his babies?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo; she will nurse <i>her</i> babies‚ÅÝ‚Äî<i>their</i> babies, not ‚Äòhis‚Äô merely.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd keep on being an inspector?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd keep on being an inspector‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor four hours a day‚ÅÝ‚Äîin two shifts. Not a bit more difficult than cooking, my dear boy.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe will not be with her children‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe will be with her children twenty hours out of the twenty-four‚ÅÝ‚Äîif she wants to. But Hallie‚Äôs not specially good with children.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You see, John, the women have specialized‚ÅÝ‚Äîeven in motherhood.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Then he went on at considerable length to show how there had arisen a recognition of far more efficient motherhood than was being given; that those women best fitted for the work had given eager, devoted lives to it and built up a new science of Humaniculture; that no woman was allowed to care for her children without proof of capacity.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAllowed by whom?‚Äù I put in.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBy the other women‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Department of Child Culture‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Government.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd the fathers‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo they submit to this, tamely?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo; they cheerfully agree and approve. Absolutely the biggest thing that has happened, some of us think, is that new recognition of the importance of childhood. We are raising better people now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I was silent for a while, pulling up bits of grass and snapping small sticks into inch pieces.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere was a good deal of talk about Eugenics, I remember,‚Äù I said at last, ‚Äúand‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat was that thing? Endowment of Motherhood?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes‚ÅÝ‚Äîman‚Äôs talk,‚Äù Owen explained. ‚ÄúYou see, John, we couldn‚Äôt look at women but in one way‚ÅÝ‚Äîin the old days; it was all a question of sex with us‚ÅÝ‚Äîinevitably, we being males. Our whole idea of improvement was in better breeding; our whole idea of motherhood was in each woman‚Äôs devoting her whole life to her own children. That turbid freshet of an Englishman, Wells, who did so much to stir his generation, said ‚ÄòI am wholly feminist‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Äîand he was! He saw women only as females and wanted them endowed as such. He was never able to see them as human beings and amply competent to take care of themselves.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, our women, getting hold of this idea that they really are human creatures, simply blossomed forth in new efficiency. They specialized the food business‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHallie‚Äôs right about the importance of that‚ÅÝ‚Äîand then they specialized the baby business. All women who wish to, have babies; but if they wish to take care of them they must show a diploma.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I looked at him. I didn‚Äôt like it‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut what difference did that make? I had died thirty years ago, it appeared.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA diploma for motherhood!‚Äù I repeated; but he corrected me.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot at all. Any woman can be a mother‚ÅÝ‚Äîif she‚Äôs normal. I said she had to have a diploma as a child-culturist‚ÅÝ‚Äîquite a different matter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt see the difference.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I suppose not. I didn‚Äôt, once,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúAny and every mother was supposed to be competent to ‚Äòraise‚Äô children‚ÅÝ‚Äîand look at the kind of people we raised! You see, we are beginning to learn‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust beginning. You needn‚Äôt imagine that we are in a state of perfection‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere are more new projects up for discussion than ever before. We‚Äôve only made a start. The consequences, so far, are so good that we are boiling over with propositions for future steps.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGo on about the women,‚Äù I said. ‚ÄúI want to know the worst and become resigned.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs nothing very bad to tell,‚Äù he continued cheerfully. ‚ÄúWhen a girl is born she is treated in all ways as if she was a boy; there is no hint made in any distinction between them except in the perfectly open physiological instruction as to their future duties. Children, young humans, grow up under precisely the same conditions. I speak, of course, of the most advanced people‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere are still backward places‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs plenty to do yet.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen the growing girls are taught of their place and power as mothers‚ÅÝ‚Äîand they have tremendously high ideals. That‚Äôs what has done so much to raise the standard in men. It came hard, but it worked.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I raised my head with keen interest, remarking, ‚ÄúI‚Äôve glimpsed a sort of ‚Äòiron hand in a velvet glove‚Äô back of all this. What did they do?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Owen looked rather grim for a moment.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe worst of it was twenty or twenty-five years back. Most of those men are dead. That new religious movement stirred the socio-ethical sense to sudden power; it coincided with the women‚Äôs political movement, urging measures for social improvement; its enormous spread, both by preaching and literature, lit up the whole community with new facts, ideas and feelings. Health‚ÅÝ‚Äîphysical purity‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas made a practical ideal. The young women learned the proportion of men with syphilis and gonorrhea and decided it was wrong to marry them. That was enough. They passed laws in every State requiring a clean bill of health with every marriage license. Diseased men had to die bachelors‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd did men submit to legislation like that?‚Äù I protested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy not? It was so patently for the protection of the race‚ÅÝ‚Äîof the family‚ÅÝ‚Äîof the women and children. Women were solid for it, of course‚ÅÝ‚Äîand all the best men with them. To oppose it was almost a confession of guilt and injured a man‚Äôs chances of marriage.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt used to be said that any man could find a woman to marry him,‚Äù I murmured, meditatively.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMaybe he could‚ÅÝ‚Äîonce. He certainly cannot now. A man who has one of those diseases is so reported‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust like small-pox, you see. Moreover, it is registered against him by the Department of Eugenics‚ÅÝ‚Äîphysicians are required to send in lists; any girl can find out.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt must have left a large proportion of unmarried women.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt did, at first. And that very thing was of great value to the world. They were wise, conscientious, strong women, you see, and they poured all their tremendous force into social service. Lots of them went into child culture‚ÅÝ‚Äîused their mother-power that way. It wasn‚Äôt easy for them; it wasn‚Äôt easy for the left-over men, either!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt must have increased prostitution to an awful extent,‚Äù I said.</p>
			<p>Owen shook his head and regarded me quizzically.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is the worst of it,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúThere isn‚Äôt any.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I sat up. I stood up. I walked up and down. ‚ÄúNo prostitution! I‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI can‚Äôt believe it. Why, prostitution is a social necessity, as old as Nineveh!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Owen laughed outright. ‚ÄúToo late, old man; too late! I know we used to think so. We did use to call it a ‚Äòsocial necessity,‚Äô didn‚Äôt we? Come, now, tell me what necessity it was <i>to the women</i>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I stopped my march and looked at him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo the women,‚Äù he repeated. ‚ÄúWhat did they want of prostitution? What good did it do them?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey made a living at it,‚Äù I replied, rather lamely.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, a nice, honorable, pleasant, healthy living, didn‚Äôt they? With all women perfectly well able to earn an excellent living decently; with all women fully educated about these matters and knowing what a horrible death was before them in this business; with all women brought up like human beings and not like over-sexed female animals, and with all women quite free to marry if they wished to‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow many, do you think, would choose that kind of business?</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe never waited for them to choose it, remember! We fooled them and lied to them and dragged them in‚ÅÝ‚Äîand drove them in‚ÅÝ‚Äîforced them in‚ÅÝ‚Äîand kept them as slaves and prisoners. They didn‚Äôt really enjoy the life; you know that. Why should they go into it if they do not have to‚ÅÝ‚Äîto accommodate us?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you mean to tell me there are no‚ÅÝ‚Äîwantons‚ÅÝ‚Äîamong women?‚Äù I demanded.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I don‚Äôt mean any such thing. There are various kinds of over-developed and morbidly developed women as there are men, and we haven‚Äôt weeded them out entirely. But the whole thing is now recognized as pathological‚ÅÝ‚Äîcases for medical treatment, or perhaps surgical. Besides, wantonness is not prostitution. Prostitution is a social crime of the worst order. No one thing did more harm. The women stamped it out.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLegislated us all into morality, did they?‚Äù I inquired sarcastically.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLegislation did a good deal; education did more; the new religion did most; social opinion helped. You remember we men never really tried to legislate against prostitution‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe wanted it to go on.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, surely we did legislate against it‚ÅÝ‚Äîand it was of no use!‚Äù I protested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo; we legislated against the women, but not against the men, or the thing itself. We examined the women, and fined them, and licensed them‚ÅÝ‚Äîand never did anything against the men. Women legislators used very different measures, I assure you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose it is for the good of the world,‚Äù I presently admitted; ‚Äúbut‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut you don‚Äôt quite like to think of men in this new and peculiar position of having to be good!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFrankly‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt. I‚Äôm willing to be good, but‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt like to be given no choice.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, now, look at it. As it was, we had one way, according to what we thought was good for us. Rather than lead clean, contented lives at some expense to ourselves in the way of moral and physical control, we deliberately sacrificed an army of women to a horrible life and a more horrible death, and corrupted the blood of the nation. It was on the line of health they made their stand, not on ‚Äòmorality‚Äô alone. Under our new laws it is held a crime to poison another human being with syphilis, just as much as to use prussic acid.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNellie said you had no crime now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, well, Nellie is an optimist. I suppose she meant the old kinds and definitions. We don‚Äôt call things ‚Äòcrimes‚Äô any more. And then, really, there is not a hundredth part of the evil done that there used to be. We know more, you see, and have less temptation.‚Äù</p>
			<p>We were silent for a while. I watched a gull float and wheel over the blue water. Big airships flew steadily along certain lines. Little ones sailed about on all sides.</p>
			<p>One darted over our heads and lit with a soft swoop on an open promontory.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDidn‚Äôt they use to buzz?‚Äù I asked Owen.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course; just as the first motor boats thumped and banged abominably. We will not stand for unnecessary noise, as we used to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow do you stop it? More interference with the individual rights?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMore recognition of public rights. A bad noise is a nuisance, like a bad smell. We didn‚Äôt used to mind it much‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut the women did. You see, what women like has to be considered now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt always was considered!‚Äù I broke in with some heat. ‚ÄúThe women of America were the most spoiled, pampered lot on earth; men gave up to them in all ways.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAt home, perhaps, but not in public. The city and state weren‚Äôt run to suit them at all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy should they be? Women belong at home. If they push into a man‚Äôs world they ought to take the consequences.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Owen stretched his long legs and looked up at the soft, brilliant blue above us.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy do you call the world ‚Äòman‚Äôs?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was man‚Äôs; it ought to be. Woman‚Äôs place is in the home. I suppose I sound like ancient history to you?‚Äù and I laughed a little shamefacedly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe have <i>rather</i> lost that point of view,‚Äù Owen guardedly admitted. ‚ÄúYou see‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù and then he laughed. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs no use, John; no matter how we put it to you it‚Äôs a jar. The world‚Äôs thought has changed‚ÅÝ‚Äîand you have got to catch up!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSuppose I refuse? Suppose I really am unable?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe won‚Äôt suppose it for a moment,‚Äù he said cheerfully. ‚ÄúIdeas are not nailed down. Just take out what you had and insert some new ones. Women are people‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust as much as we are; that‚Äôs a <i>fact</i>, my dear fellow. You‚Äôll have to accept it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd are men allowed to be people, too?‚Äù I asked gloomily.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, of course! Nothing has interfered with our position as human beings; it is only our sex supremacy that we have lost.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd do you <i>like</i> it?‚Äù I demanded.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSome men made a good deal of fuss at first‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe old-fashioned kind, and all the worst varieties. But modern men aren‚Äôt worried in the least over their position.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ See here, John, you don‚Äôt grasp this‚ÅÝ‚Äîwomen are vastly more agreeable than they used to be.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I looked at him in amazement.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFact!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúOf course, we loved our own mothers and daughters and sisters, more or less, no matter how they looked or what they did; and when we were ‚Äòin love‚Äô there was no limit to the glory of ‚Äòthe beloved object.‚Äô But you and I know that women were pretty unsatisfactory in the old days.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I refused to admit it, but he went on calmly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe ‚Äòwife and mother‚Äô was generally a tired, nervous, overworked creature. She soon lost her beauty and vigor, her charm and inspiration. We were forever chasing fine, handsome, highly desirable young girls, and forever reducing them to weary, worn-out women‚ÅÝ‚Äîin the name of love! The gay outsiders were always a fresh attraction‚ÅÝ‚Äîas long as we couldn‚Äôt have them.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ See here, John, can‚Äôt you understand? Our old way of using women wasn‚Äôt good for them‚ÅÝ‚Äînor for us, either, by the way‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut it simply spoiled the women. They were hopelessly out of the running with us in all human lines; their business was housework, and ours was world work. There was very little real companionship.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow women are intelligent, experienced, well-trained citizens, fully our equals in any line of work they take up, and with us everywhere. It‚Äôs made the world over!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMade it ‚Äòfeminist‚Äô through and through, I suppose!‚Äù I groaned.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot a bit! It used to be ‚Äòmasculist‚Äô through and through; now it‚Äôs just <i>human</i>. And, see here‚ÅÝ‚Äîwomen are more attractive, as women, than they used to be.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I stared at this, unbelieving.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs true! You see, they are healthy; there‚Äôs a new standard of physical beauty‚ÅÝ‚Äîvery Greek‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou must have noticed already the big, vigorous, fresh-colored, free-stepping girls.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I had, even in my brief hours of observation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are far more perfect physically, better developed mentally, with a higher moral sense‚ÅÝ‚Äîyes, you needn‚Äôt look like that! We used to call them our ‚Äòmoral superiors,‚Äô just because they had the one virtue we insisted on‚ÅÝ‚Äîand we never noticed the lack in other lines. Women to-day are truthful, brave, honest, generous, self-controlled; they are‚ÅÝ‚Äîjollier, more reasonable, more companionable.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, I‚Äôm glad to hear that,‚Äù I rather grudgingly admitted. ‚ÄúI was afraid they would have lost all‚ÅÝ‚Äîcharm.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, we used to feel that way, I remember. Funny! We were convinced on the one hand that there was nothing to a woman but her eternal womanliness, and on the other we were desperately afraid her womanliness would disappear the moment she turned her mind to anything else. I assure you that men love women, in general and in particular, much more than they used to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>I pondered. ‚ÄúBut‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat sort of home life do you have?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThink for a moment of what we used to have‚ÅÝ‚Äîeven in a ‚Äòhappy home.‚Äô The man had the whole responsibility of keeping it up‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis business life and interests all foreign to her. She had the whole labor of running it‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe direct manual labor in the great majority of cases‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe management in any case. They were strangers in an industrial sense.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen he came home he had to drop all his line of thought‚ÅÝ‚Äîand she hers, except that she generally unloaded on him the burden of inadequacy in housekeeping. Sometimes he unloaded, too. They could sympathize and condole, but neither could help the other.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe whole thing cost like sin, too. It was a living nightmare to lots of men‚ÅÝ‚Äîand women! The only things they had in common were their children and ‚Äòsocial interests.‚Äô</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äînowadays, in the first place every body is easy about money. (I‚Äôll go into that later.) No woman marries except for love‚ÅÝ‚Äîand good judgment, too; all women are more desirable‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore men want to marry them‚ÅÝ‚Äîand that improves the men! You see, a man naturally cares more for women than for anything else in life‚ÅÝ‚Äîand they know it! It‚Äôs the handle they lift by. That‚Äôs what has eliminated tobacco.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you mean to say that these women have arbitrarily prevented smoking?‚Äù I do not smoke myself, but I was angry nevertheless.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot a bit of it, John‚ÅÝ‚Äînot a bit of it. Anybody can smoke who wants to.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen why don‚Äôt they?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause women do not like it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat has that to do with it? Can‚Äôt a man do what he wants to‚ÅÝ‚Äîeven if they don‚Äôt like it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, he can; but it costs too much. Men like tobacco, but they like love better, old man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs it one of your legal requirements for marriage?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, not legal; but women disapprove of tobacco-y lovers, husbands, fathers; they know that the excessive use of it is injurious, and won‚Äôt marry a heavy smoker. But the main point is that they simply don‚Äôt like the smell of the stuff, or of the man who uses it‚ÅÝ‚Äîmost women, that is.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut what <i>difference does</i> it make? I dare say that most women did not like it before, but surely a man has a right‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo make himself a disgusting object to his wife,‚Äù Owen interrupted. ‚ÄúYes, he has a ‚Äòright‚Äô to. We would have a right to bang on a tin pan, I suppose‚ÅÝ‚Äîor to burn rubber, but he wouldn‚Äôt be popular!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs tyranny!‚Äù I protested.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot at all,‚Äù he said, imperturbably. ‚ÄúWe had no idea what a nuisance we used to be, that‚Äôs all; or how much women put up with that they did not like at all. I asked a woman once‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen I was a bachelor‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy she objected to tobacco, and she frankly replied that a man who did not smoke was much pleasanter to kiss! She was a very fascinating little widow‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI confess it made me think.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs the same with liquor, I suppose? Let‚Äôs get it all told.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, only more so. Alcoholism was a race evil of the worst sort. I cannot imagine how we put up with it so long.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs this spotless world of yours one solid temperance union?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPractically. We use some light wines and a little spirits yet, but infrequently‚ÅÝ‚Äîin this country, at least, and Europe is vastly improved.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut that was a much more serious thing than the other. It wasn‚Äôt a mere matter of not marrying! They used all kinds of means. But come on‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe‚Äôll be late to dinner; and dinner, at least, is still a joy, Brother John.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
